The main protagonist of the Touhou Project series
"Shrine Maiden of Paradise"
Reimu Hakurei
Species: Human
Main Abilities: Flying through the air
Music Themes: "Maiden's Capriccio ~ Dream Battle" etc.
As the Hakurei Shrine Maiden, her job is to exterminate youkai: that's Reimu Hakurei's everday life. The Hakurei Shrine is built on the eastern edge of Gensokyo, on the border with the "Outside World",
but because most of the time there are very few worshipers, she spends her time lazily drinking tea or pretending to sweep the grounds.
If you asked her why she exterminates youkai, she'd say it's the duty imparted to the "Hakurei Shrine Maiden", who is tied to Gensokyo's very existence.
The Hakurei Shrine exists to watch over the "Great Hakurei Barrier" which separates the sealed paradise of "Gensokyo" from the "Outside World".
Generations of shrine maidens have made their living resolving any "Incidents" that might endanger it. If you want to know why the barrier was created, or about the events leading up to its creation, please refer to its own article.
While Reimu is normally carefree and lacks a sense of danger, when fighting she displays all of her god-given natural talents, facing every last opponent. In a danmaku fight, by pretending to fight for their lives, they can maintain a sense of tension between humans and youkai.
Perhaps you could say that they're "putting all of their effort into playing around." As her position causes her to come into contact with both humans and youkai indiscriminately, powerful youkai are fond of her while weak youkai are terrified of her.
"Ordinary Magician"
Marisa Kirisame
Species: Human
Abilities: Using magic
Music Themes: "Love-Colored Master Spark" etc.
Marisa is a magician. Though she is human, she can wield very powerful spells, and sticks her neck into Incidents to exterminate youkai as if competing with Reimu.
She lives away from other humans in the Forest of Magic, where she runs a jack-of-all-trades business called the Kirisame Magic Shop. However, since the forest is inhospitable to normal humans, she hardly gets any customers.
Because of that, most of her time is devoted either to magical research or visiting the Hakurei Shrine.
She prefers her magic flashy. She likes to use light or heat magic, with star motifs, and puts an emphasis on sheer power. What she seeks from her magic is nothing but pure destructive force.
She's said to have a contrarian personality, but it's really only to a slight extent; she's basically just honest and impulsive to a fault.
Although she has a showy & heroic side, she's also the type that works steadily to achieve whatever her goal may be.
In contrast to Reimu's limitless innate talent, Marisa's ability to use magic is something she worked hard to learn.
the Embodiment of Scarlet Devil (TH06)
Released: Aug 11, 2002
Genre: Bullet hell shoot 'em up
During a peaceful summer in Gensokyo, an unnatural scarlet mist appears without warning and covers much of the land. It is strong enough to block out the sun, causing the affected areas to become dark and cold.
Reimu Hakurei, a shrine maiden working at the Hakurei Shrine, and Marisa Kirisame, a magician, set out to find the source of the mist. Their search will lead them to the Scarlet Devil Mansion and to its eccentric owners...
"Youkai of the Dusk"
Rumia
Species: Youkai
Abilities: Manipulating Darkness
Music Themes: "Apparitions Stalk the Night"
Rumia is a youkai of darkness. She is a man-eating youkai, but she falls into a weaker category of youkai. Usually, she doesn't have a purpose and is just a mysterious youkai flying aimlessly around Gensokyo.
Rumia is capable of manipulating darkness. She hates sunlight, which she often surrounds herself with pitch-black darkness in order to avoid. The darkness is deep enough to render light from torches and the like useless.
However, the range of her darkness is very limited, and a major disadvantage is that it blinds Rumia herself as well. Therefore, it's currently unknown whether it even has any uses other than avoiding sunlight.
A ribbon is attached to her head, but this is actually an ofuda. It's unclear who attached it to her, though we do know that Rumia can't touch it herself.
She's fine in moonlight. On nights where a full moon is out, you may be able to see Rumia outside of her darkness.
Daiyousei (Greater Fairy)
Although she has no actual name, she is referred to as "Daiyousei" to distinguish her from typical fairies.
Fairies are generally cheerful, so she may have been attacking the heroines simply out of mischief.
She was encountered while travelling over Misty Lake, so she may just simply live there.
"Fairy of the Ice"
Cirno
Species: Ice Fairy
Abilities: Manipulating cold
Music Themes: "Tomboyish Girl in Love" etc.
Cirno is an ice fairy. She seems to typically dwell near the "Misty Lake". She has the ability to manipulate cold, and freeze absolutely anything (even danmaku, at times).
Fairies are closely related to phenomena that occur in nature, and can be found just about anywhere in Gensokyo.
Most fairies aren't very dangerous, but since Cirno is quick to pick fights and has powerful control over cold, she's a relatively strong fairy within Gensokyo.
Her power is all that's strong about her, though; she's not smart at all. Nearly all fairies are similar in this respect,
hardly paying any thought to most things that go on. Another trait that most fairies share is a penchant for mischief.
"Chinese Girl"
Hong Meiling
Species: Youkai
Abilities: Usage of Qi
Music Themes: "Shanghai Alice of Meiji 17" etc.
The gatekeeper of the Scarlet Devil Mansion. Residing in the mansion along with the vampire Remilia, she normally works as a gatekeeper.
Although at first glance she looks no different from a human, Meiling is a full-fledged youkai. However, she doesn't really make use any of the mysterious spells or abilities that such beings often use.
Her "ability to use qi" is the ability to control what's known as "Qigong", which is learned by expert martial artists. As this power is chiefly used in martial arts, you could say she is unusually physically oriented for Gensokyo.
Her job is to be a gatekeeper, but she doesn't have the personality to throw out everyone she sees. In fact, she's able to have friendly conversations with passing humans, probably because she's unable to do so with most of the Scarlet Devil Mansion.
Koakuma (Little Devil)
She has no actual name, but she's called "Koakuma" for the sake of convenience. Koakuma is a devil where she's seen around the library of Scarlet Devil Mansion where she apparently lives in the mansion.
"The Unmoving Great Library"
Patchouli Knowledge
Species: Magician (Witch)
Abilities: Manipulation of fire, water, wood, metal, earth, sun, and moon
Music Themes: "Locked Girl ~ The Girl's Sealed Room" etc.
She's a magician who is friends with Remilia, the owner of the Scarlet Devil Mansion, and has settled into the library located in its basement.
The library contains a huge number of books, ranging from grimoires on new magic developed by Patchouli herself to books brought in from the outside world.
However, since the library is located in the mansion's basement, it's not only dusty but moldy. She's suffered from asthma since birth so she should be having a hard time in such an environment, but as she spends most of her time reading books she hardly ever leaves the library.
There are several magicians in Gensokyo, but Patchouli seems to be the only natural-born one, in that she's been a magician since birth. Physically, she's fundamentally the same as a human, or perhaps even more fragile.
"Maid of the Scarlet Devil Mansion"
Sakuya Izayoi
Species: Human
Abilities: Time manipulation
Music Themes: "Lunar Clock ~ Luna Dial" etc.
Sakuya is a maid working for the vampire Remilia Scarlet. In order to serve them, the mansion is staffed with a large number of maids, but in charge of them all is the sole human of the household, the head maid Sakuya Izayoi.
Furthermore, as the other maids are all whimsical fairies who are useless for real work, it is likely that Sakuya runs everything herself. Perhaps because she's in charge of all household chores, she is very skilled with the knife and uses it as her main weapon.
While Sakuya excels as both a maid and a bodyguard, she also has a special ability that's unique to her, even in the supernatural-dominated Gensokyo: the ability to control time.
Specifically, she can control the flow of time to do things such as move while time is stopped or speed up time for a particular object.
However, she cannot go against the flow of time itself, so she can't make things not have happened or travel back in time. Furthermore, as an extension of her power she can also control space.
Despite being the maid of a vampire, her prized knives are made of silver, which has led to endless rumors that she used to be a vampire hunter who Remilia got the better of.
"The Scarlet Devil"
Remilia Scarlet
Species: Vampire
Abilities: Manipulation of fate
Music Themes: "Septette for a Dead Princess"
Remilia Scarlet is a vampire, which are rare in Gensokyo. Vampires are basically as they are commonly known, with many powerful abilities coupled with plenty of weaknesses.
Obviously that includes a weakness to sunlight. Therefore, when she wanted to go outside and have fun she schemed to block the sunlight. She covered Gensokyo in a deep red mist.
Although she is over 500 years old, both her cruelty and curiosity match her youthful appearance. She seems to normally stay in the Scarlet Devil Mansion, giving her head maid Sakuya selfish orders, or enjoying her special red teas.
Furthermore, while we did write at the outset that she has a lot of weaknesses, that doesn't mean she can't deal with them at all. For example, she can handle sunlight simply by holding a parasol.
"Sister of the Devil"
Flandre Scarlet
Species: Vampire
Abilities: Destroying absolutely anything
Music Themes: "U.N. Owen Was Her?"
Remilia has a sister connected by blood. Her name is Flandre. However, despite being the sister of the mistress of the house, she is normally prevented from leaving by the other residents.
Flandre's power to "Destroy Anything" is just as dangerous as it sounds, and on top of that she doesn't even need to touch her target to destroy it. Quite the dreadful ability.
A vampire's strength normally comes from their overwhelming physical prowess, but she has such a fearsome power as well. Who knows what would happen if she were to go on a rampage, even for a moment?
However, even within the mansion almost nobody interacts with her in her daily life, and she herself hardly ever tries to leave, so most of her life is shrouded in mystery. Even things like her relationship with her sister is a mystery.
Perfect Cherry Blossom (TH07)
Released: Aug 17, 2003
Genre: Bullet hell shoot 'em up
Winter drags on past its expiration date in Gensokyo, eventually prompting the three main characters – Reimu Hakurei, Marisa Kirisame, and Sakuya Izayoi – to investigate the cause.
Their travels lead them into the Netherworld, where they discover that certain people are attempting to gather the essence of spring for themselves, for some unknown cause.
"What Winter Left Behind"
Letty Whiterock
Species: Youkai (Type of yuki-onna)
Abilities: Manipulation of chill
Music Themes: "Crystallized Silver"
She appears from nowhere in particular when winter arrives, but is never seen during other seasons. It's said that outside of winter, she goes into hiding somewhere and hibernates.
She pops up to bother Reimu and co. as they're trying to resolve the incident and end the long winter. However, She thinks that it'd be nice if winter went on forever, but also accepts that it's natural for spring to eventually come.
Letty is capable of manipulating chilliness. Specifically, she can strengthen the natural chill of winter, lower the temperature and so on. Unlike Cirno's ability to "manipulate cold," Letty can't create cold things like ice out of nowhere.
But because she can control the power of nature itself to her liking, one can also say that it's a very powerful ability. Lowering the temperature allows her to affect a considerably wide area, which is also a strong point.
"Black Cat of Bad Omens"
Chen
Species: Beast Youkai (Bakeneko)
Abilities: Use of sorcery
Music Themes: "Diao Ye Zong (withered leaf)"
Chen is a shikigami employed by Ran Yakumo. While she can use various sorceries and has excellent physical prowess, unlike a shikigami of Ran's level she seems to be bad with numbers and such.
Like Ran, Chen is actually "the shikigami possessing a bakeneko", but in her case the possessed bakeneko is a clearly distinct being. As she is vulnerable to water both while possessed and in her original state, splashing water on her will dispel the shikigami.
"Seven-Colored Puppeteer"
Alice Margatroid
Species: Magician (Youkai)
Abilities: Magic, Handling dolls
Music Themes: "Doll Judgement ~ The Girl Who Played with People's Shapes" etc.
She is a former human who only recently became a youkai through her studies, so she still retains habits from her time as a human— like eating and sleeping.
Like Marisa, she lives somewhere in the Forest of Magic, where she diligently keeps up her research. Her specialty is using magic to manipulate dolls, and can control a large number of them at the same time.
She was given the title of "Seven-Colored Doll User" in "Perfect Cherry Blossom", and when speaking with Reimu or Marisa ends up making the claim that her power over seven colors is better than their two colors, Red-White or Black-White. She certainly appears to use different dolls for each of spellcards anyway.
All her dolls are handmade, and her house is filled with them. All of her housework is done by the dolls, but since he has to move them herself this isn't any less work for her.
"Fairy Herald of Spring"
Lily White
Species: Fairy
Abilities: Announcing that spring has come
A peculiar individual with a unique name among the fairies. She can quickly perceive even the faintest hint of Spring, and she flies around Gensokyo to announce the coming of Spring.
When she's informed of Spring's presence, she'll promptly leave, so not much is actually known about her.
"Poltergeist Violinist"
Lunasa Prismriver (Prismriver Sisters)
Species: Phantom (Poltergeist)
Abilities: Performing on musical instruments without hands or feet. Performing melancholic notes
Music Themes: "Phantom Band ~ Phantom Ensemble"
Lunasa Prismriver is a member of the Prismriver Sisters who performs magnificent music as part of the "Prismriver Ensemble" along with Merlin Prismriver and Lyrica Prismriver.
Melancholic notes are notes that calm people's feelings. Upon hearing her performance too much, the listener falls into such depression, where they don't to want to do anything.
"Poltergeist Trumpeter"
Merlin Prismriver (Prismriver Sisters)
Species: Phantom (Poltergeist)
Abilities: Performing on musical instruments without hands or feet, performing maniac notes
Music Themes: "Phantom Band ~ Phantom Ensemble"
Maniac notes are notes that enhance people's feelings. Upon hearing her performance and receiving too much influence, a listener's feelings become abnormally good so as not to be able to speak, and would induce a feeling of wanting to do a spontaneous dance.
Also, since the sound of trumpets resound far away, it may have an effect on the mind and spirit even if heard from afar.
"Poltergeist Keyboardist"
Lyrica Prismriver (Prismriver Sisters)
Species: Phantom (Poltergeist)
Abilities: Performing on musical instruments without hands or feet, performing illusionary notes
Music Themes: "Phantom Band ~ Phantom Ensemble"
Illusionary notes are notes that don't exist in the natural world, the "dead" notes of the outside world, so to say. It integrates "melancholic" and "maniac" notes and has an effect of making them easier to hear.
The added effect of making the three sisters' performance more tolerable to its listeners is due to her help.
Layla Prismriver
"Half-Human Half-Phantom Gardener"
Youmu Konpaku
Species: Half-human half-phantom
Abilities: Handling sword techniques
Music Themes: "Hiroari Shoots a Strange Bird ~ Till When?" etc.
Employed as a gardener by the Saigyouji household, she also serves double duty as a fencing instructor. By appearance, she looks like an immature, young girl, but given that she's missing half of her life-span due to her being also a half-phantom, this half-human/half-ghost might have been around longer than it appears.
Basically, she's a meek but also diligent and serious person, but since she has a hard time to get a grip on humans, she's rather naive and easy to trick, which happens a lot.
The Konpaku family is a lineage of half-human, half-phantoms. Her predecessor was Konpaku Youki, who worked for the Saigyouji household for up to 300 years before suddenly retiring and absconding to unknown whereabouts, leaving young Youmu as the head of the family.
And that's how the inexperienced Youmu ended up as the second generation servant of the Saigyouji household. Perhaps this is due to the sudden baton pass, but one gets the impression that she's simply at the mercy of her master's whims.
Perhaps due to the Saigyouji household being responsible for the management of phantoms in the Netherworld, Youmu is in possession of a pair of swords, which both intrinsically have powers related to phantoms.
The longer one is called Roukanken, and according to Youmu it can "Cut Through Ten Phantoms." As for the shorter Hakurouken, anyone cut by it will have their doubts severed.
Youki Konpaku
"Dreaming Ghost"
Yuyuko Saigyouji
Species: Ghost
Abilities: Manipulation of death
Music Themes: "Bloom Nobly, Ink-Black Cherry Blossom ~ Border of Life" etc.
She ordered her gardener Youmu to gather spring from Gensokyo, setting off what came to be known as the "Spring Snow Incident". Her personality is extraordinarily carefree, and she is always playing dumb.
Despite the fact that, unlike phantoms, ghosts are incredibly dangerous beings, she's quite friendly towards humans. However, ultimately her playing dumb is just an act and she possesses both a sharp mind and a keen eye.
She normally resides in Hakugyokurou, a huge mansion in the Netherworld. Her job is to manage the phantoms waiting to either pass on or reincarnate. Incidentally, she didn't just arbitrarily decide to take over because her power was suited for it: apparently she was formally given the role by the Yama.
Even the tranquil Netherworld is affected by the four seasons, but there exists a cherry tree in Hakugyokurou that will never bloom, the "Saigyou Ayakashi". Furthermore, the documents pertaining to it were read on a whim by Yuyuko.
When her idle curiosity became a concrete plan, that was the start of the Spring Snow Incident. "If there's someone sealed beneath the roots of the cherry blossom, wouldn't the seal break when the flowers bloom? And if I break the seal, wouldn't that person be revived?"
However, in actuality it's not that "the tree is sealed" but rather that "the person beneath the tree is sealing it" so her plan could never have worked anyway.
"Shikigami of the Gap Youkai"
Ran Yakumo
Species: Youkai Fox (Shikigami)
Abilities: Using Shikigami
Music Themes: "A Maiden's Illusionary Funeral ~ Necro-Fantasy"
Ran Yakumo is Yukari's shikigami. she was visiting Hakugyokurou to investigate the boundary as a proxy for the sleeping Yukari, where she encountered the protagonists, which led to battle.
Her personality is gentle, and just like her fox body she loves fried tofu. Her fundamental behavioral principle is to "Execute Yukari's Programming", so as long as she is not attacked she won't start fights on her own or anything.
However, her master Yukari would prefer to see her act beyond simply following the orders she's given, so they experience their share of difficulties.
A shikigami as powerful as Ran can employ their own shikigami, despite being a shikigami themselves. That shikigami is Chen.
"Youkai of Boundaries"
Yukari Yakumo
Species: Youkai
Abilities: Manipulation of boundaries
Music Themes: "Necrofantasia" etc.
At the request of her old friend Yuyuko, she weakened the border of the Netherworld in order to allow Yuyuko to gather spring from Gensokyo. And once the incident was over, she was again asked to redraw it.
Her personality is, in a word, suspicious. And while she looks no different from a human, her behavior is quite unlike one and the average Joe would have difficulty understanding what she's thinking. Because she sleeps during the day and is active at night, she leaves most of her tasks to her shikigami.
While her residence is usually placed on the other side of the Hakurei Shrine, seemingly right on the edge of Gensokyo, her tendency to appear and vanish like the wind makes such details meaningless. While you could say that her activities cover the whole of Gensoyko, the fact that Yukari isn't bound by even that is what's so terrifying about her.
Yukari's ability is the "manipulation of boundaries". It's a far-too-powerful ability that can, logically speaking, affect anything. Not only has she been living in Gensokyo since ancient times, she was also involved in the establishment of the Great Hakurei Barrier that separates the outside world from Gensokyo,
and bears the role of having drawn the line over which other characters have shown up in Gensokyo. The manipulation of shikigami could be considered another of Yukari's special abilities. Resembling the computer programming of the outside world, the shiki will carry out its master's order exactly as commanded.
Her high intelligence, particularly with regard to manipulating numbers, makes her excel at calculations and analysis. However, there seems to be a flaw with their application. While she employs several shikigami, the one she makes the most use of is Ran Yakumo.
Immaterial and Missing Power (TH7.5)
Released: Dec 30, 2004
Genre: Fighting Game
Gensokyo has settled down after the Spring Snow Incident that occurred in Perfect Cherry Blossom. Reimu Hakurei and the others are currently having a feast every three days at the Hakurei shrine.
During these feasts, a strange mist appears. The playable character decides to get the cause of the never-ending feast schedule and the mist.
"Tiny Night Parade of One Hundred Demons"
Suika Ibuki
Species: Oni
Abilities: Manipulation of density and sparseness
Music Themes: "Onigashima in the Fairyland ~ Missing Power" etc.
Suika Ibuki is an oni. She carries a gourd that can produce infinite sake on her back, and loves sake so much that she could spend several hundred years drinking nonstop. She even drunkenly sways back and forth.
Oni lived in Gensokyo long ago, but after a certain point, they vanished from the land. Humans had previously built a relationship of mutual trust with the oni despite harboring fear towards them, but in the end they betrayed that trust, prompting the oni to leave.
The oni abandoned the humans and Gensokyo, and are said to have gone to a place called the "Land of Oni". Suika is an oni who returned to Gensokyo, and caused a slightly bizarre incident where she held a banquet at the Hakurei Shrine every 3 days.
Suika is capable of manipulating density. Essentially, she can gather things together or spread them apart. Applications of this power include compressing objects and making them hot, or dispersing them into vapor.
She can also immensely magnify or disperse earthquakes. On top of that, she can also manipulate the density of things like "people's feelings"; the incident in "Immaterial and Missing Power" was caused via this ability.
And though it tends to be overshadowed by her ability, another powerful weapon of Suika's is her brute strength-- ostensibly enough to destroy the Youkai Mountain all by herself.
Imperishable Night (TH8)
Released: Aug 15, 2004
Genre: Bullet hell shoot 'em up
It's the eve of the Harvest Moon Festival in Gensokyo when youkai sense that something is wrong with the moon. It appears that the moon has been replaced by a fake moon. The main characters stop time and head off to find the culprit to try and ensure a full moon for the festival.
Their journey leads them into the Bamboo Forest of the Lost and finally to Eientei, inhabited by beings from the Moon itself.
"A Bug of Light Wriggling in the Dark"
Wriggle Nightbug
Species: Firefly Youkai
Abilities: Manipulation of insects
Music Themes: "Stirring an Autumn Moon ~ Mooned Insect"
Wriggle Nightbug is an insect youkai. There are many types of insects, but Wriggle in particular is a firefly. She has antennae and wings, but apart from that, she doesn't look much different from a small human girl.
Perhaps because she's a summer insect, she's weak to cold, and hates insecticide as well. Insect youkai were once symbols of fear and terror for humans, but it seems that nowadays, that sort of impression has largely been lost.
Wriggle is able to manipulate insects. Most insects are very weak, but they can be terrifying when they attack with sheer numbers, and above all else, they're gross. The fear and awe that they inspired in people long ago may have weakened nowadays, but the gross-out aspect may make her ability a particularly terrifying one.
"Night Sparrow Apparition"
Mystia Lorelei
Species: Night Sparrow
Abilities: Driving people insane by singing, bewildering people by singing
Music Themes: "Deaf to All but the Song"
Mystia is capable of bewildering people by singing, and also has the power to make them night-blind.  First, she sings to draw a human out, then robs them of their vision and attacks.
Also, despite stealing people's vision and attacking them, Mystia also runs a grilled lamprey stall. Lamprey is said to be effective in curing night-blindness. This may be an attempt to make money by blinding people and then selling them lamprey, but it seems that she also intends to drive nighttime yakitori stalls off the market.
"History-Eating Half Beast"
Keine Kamishirasawa
Species: Therianthrope (Were-hakutaku)
Abilities: Eating history (as a human) / Creating history (as a hakutaku)
Music Themes: "Plain Asia"
Keine is a therianthrope yokai. During the Eternal Night incident of Imperishable Night, she was unsure as to what would happen with the yokai as a result of the full moon being replaced. For this reason, Keine tried to protect the Human Village by temporarily eating the village's history for the night, rending it invisible.
As a result, the heroine and her partner, both working to resolve the incident, treated Keine as a bad guy, but she then told them to resolve the misunderstanding as she directed them to the Bamboo Forest.
She usually works as a human elementary school teacher in the Human Village, compiling history every day. However, once she sees the full moon, she transforms into a Hakutaku. During the extra stage of Imperishable Night, she was trying to protect Fujiwara no Mokou, who was hiding in the Bamboo Forest, in this Hakutaku form.
"White Rabbit of Good Fortune"
Tewi Inaba
Species: Beast Youkai
Abilities: Conferring good luck to humans
Music Themes: "White Flag of Usa Shrine"
Tewi is a youkai rabbit. Her personality is cunning and mischievous, while also cowardly, so she excels at using tricks. She's the leader of the wild rabbits, but that doesn't appear to be simply because she's a youkai rabbit.
An ability of Tewi that stands out particularly is her ability to grant luck to those she meets. That said, she often stays in the Bamboo Forest of the Lost or Eientei inside of it, so it isn't easy to find her.
Tewi is an ancient youkai who has lived since long before Gensokyo came into being, but since then she's resided in the Bamboo Forest of the Lost. The fact that the forest keeps people away by befuddling them seems to have something to do with Tewi's power. Not to mention Eirin and Kaguya built Eientei as a hiding place,
and Tewi was able to intrude into it by breaking through the spell they put over it, and approach Eirin to make a deal. Tewi herself is the lord of the forest, and the fact that she bears no ill will towards Kaguya and Eirin is because she negotiated a deal to hide them from the humans as long as they shared their wisdom with the rabbits.
"Lunar-Minded and Asynchronous Youkai Rabbit"
Reisen Udongein Inaba
Species: Moon Rabbit
Abilities: Manipulation of insanity and wavelengths
Music Themes: "Lunatic Eyes ~ Invisible Full Moon"
Reisen is a moon rabbit. Moon rabbits are a completely different kind of youkai from the rabbit youkai of Earth, and one of their specialties is being able to communicate with each other regardless of distance. Reisen's own ability apparently lets her drive people mad by manipulating wavelengths.
Despite her abilities, when the moon was under attack from Earthlings, she came to dislike fighting and fled to Earth. Hearing rumors of a place where non-humans lived, she came to Gensokyo where she met Kaguya's group.
Afterward, she received a contact from the moon rabbits claiming that "it looks like the fighting is going to begin again. We want your help so we'll be coming to get you on the night of the full moon." This led to Eirin and the others setting up their large-scale gambit.
Ever since the end of the "Eternal Night Incident", she's been selling Eirin's medicine and appearing in the human village to maintain the household medicine boxes. However, she doesn't try to get actively involved with humans.
"Brain of the Moon"
Eirin Yagokoro
Species: Lunarian
Abilities: Make any medicine
Music Themes: "Gensokyo Millennium ~ History of the Moon"
Eirin Yagokoro herself is the true culprit behind the "Eternal Night Incident". It was caused by Eirin, for Kaguya's sake. Eirin seems to have been originally born on Earth, along with the other Lunarians. However, she and others who hated impurity took their families and left Earth for the pure moon.
There they built the Lunar Capital. As someone who helped found the Lunar Capital, Eirin seems to have been relied as an influential figure, and she was also in a position to mentor many others.
Proud of her own genius intellect, Eirin used Kaguya's powers to make the elixir of immortality, the Hourai Elixir. However, those who drank the elixir would produce impurity, which was absolutely forbidden on the moon.
Seeing Kaguya, who had drank it simply out of curiosity, exiled from the moon because of her made Eirin regret her actions so she joined Kaguya in moving to Earth.
"Eternal Princess"
Kaguya Houraisan
Species: Lunarian
Abilities: Manipulation of eternity and the instantaneous
Music Themes: "Flight of the Bamboo Cutter ~ Lunatic Princess"
During the "Eternal Night Incident" the real moon was hidden from Gensokyo, and while her servant Eirin put up a fake moon. She was raised as a princess on the moon, so her personality is selfish and haughty.
While her ability is "the manipulation of eternity and the instantaneous", both of those are simply forms of manipulating time. Manipulating eternity is something like stopping time, while the instantaneous refers to the opposite, an incredibly short moment of time.
Kaguya was originally a princess of the moon, but after committing the sin of drinking the "Hourai Elixir" which grants an immortal body, she was imprisoned on the Earth, considered an impure land by the Lunar Capital. Time passed, and her crime was forgiven by the moon, which gave her permission to return.
However, together with Eirin she betrayed the moon and became a fugitive. The two of them built a residence deep within the Bamboo Forest of the Lost, which keeps people away, and prepared to spend their long lives in seclusion.
However, by coincidence they ended up sheltering another fugitive room the moon, the moon rabbit Reisen, and the possibility of once again encountering the lunar envoys arose.
Upon being consulted by Kaguya, Eirin made a proposal and implemented it herself: she cut off passage between the Earth and the moon by switching out the key, the full moon, with a fake using the Secret Method "Earth as a Sealed Room".
"Figure of the Person of Hourai"
Fujiwara no Mokou
Species: Human
Abilities: Eternal youth and immortality, resistance to and manipulation of fire
Music Themes: "Reach for the Moon, Immortal Smoke"
On the night of the full moon after the "Eternal Night Incident", she saw the protagonists, who Kaguya had gotten to come by asking if they wanted to take a test of courage. Misinterpreting them to be "assassins sent by Kaguya to kill me", a fight ensued.
While Kaguya was exiled to Earth, stories of her beauty spread and many nobles came to propose marriage. However, she refused them all by giving them impossible requests.
Mokou was the only daughter of one of those nobles shamed by Kaguya's rejection. Since then, Mokou became hostile towards Kaguya and harassed her at every opportunity.
Then, one day, she heard a rumor that Kaguya had been allowed back to the moon (*In truth, she betrayed the lunar envoys and fled). Wanting to at least steal the pot Kaguya left behind, after a series of events she obtained possession of the pot. Contained within was the Hourai Elixir itself...
In this manner, she became immortal just like Kaguya. This caused her grudge to become even more violent, as thanks to neither of them dying they could continuously attempt to kill each other. Although perhaps she's calmed down a bit ever since Kaguya stopped hiding.
Currently, Mokou guides humans who've gotten lost in the bamboo forest to the exit, seemingly in an effort to maintain some small connection to the humans of Gensokyo. There are even people from the outside world who've gotten lost in the forest.
Phantasmagoria of Flower View (TH9)
Released: Aug 14, 2005
Genre: Bullet hell shoot 'em up
Spring has arrived, but something is wrong. Flowers are blooming and the fairies are becoming active as usual, but the amount of flowers and fairies is unnatural; even non-spring flowers are blooming.
Playing as one of 16 characters, you must battle your way through 9 stages to reach Muenzuka and uncover the truth behind the abnormal spring.
"Traditional Reporter of Fantasy"
Aya Shameimaru
Species: Crow Tengu
Abilities: Manipulation of wind
Music Themes: "Wind God Girl" etc.
Aya Shameimaru is a crow tengu-- a type of youkai that's particularly fast, even compared to other tengu. Tengu generally live on mountains, and are sometimes treated as mountain gods. In Gensokyo, they've lived on the Youkai Mountain since long ago, and have built a sophisticated independent society.
Their skill in youkai arts and physical abilities are top-class among all youkai, and in particular, they can fly at astonishing speeds. Within tengu society, crow tengu such as Aya use their speed to serve as media correspondents, and Aya herself works as a newspaper reporter.
Aya's publication is called the "Bunbunmaru Newspaper", and she handles every aspect of its production by herself. Soaring around Gensokyo in search of good material is her daily routine.
But because she's the sole producer of the paper, its articles tend to be biased, and new editions are released at a slow and irregular pace. As a result, it struggles to sell copies, and Aya has yet to win the annual newspaper competition held by the tengu.
Also, Aya's policy as a reporter is to only write factual articles, but (perhaps due to some problem with her methods of gathering information?) they often contain flat-out lies.
"Little Sweet Poison"
Medicine Melancholy
Species: Doll gone youkai
Abilities: Manipulation of poison
Music Themes: "Poison Body ~ Forsaken Doll"
Medicine Melancholy is a doll who had been abandoned for a long time, and eventually transformed into a youkai who can move around on her own. She was originally a doll that was about the size of a ventriloquist's dummy, so she's relatively large by doll standards, but small for a youkai.
The doll was abandoned in a place called the "Nameless Hill," which is covered in lilies-of-the-valley. When the doll was abandoned and how long it took to become a youkai are unknown, but she's only existed as a youkai for several years, making her a relative newcomer. Perhaps out of resentment for the humans who abandoned her, liberating dolls from humans is a subject that's often on her mind.
Possibly because she was abandoned in a lily-of-the-valley field for so long, she gained the ability to manipulate various poisons, starting with plant-based poisons. In addition to using poison simply to cause harm, she can also use it for things such as controlling humans.
"Flower Master of the Four Seasons"
Yuuka Kazami
Species: Youkai
Abilities: Manipulation of flowers
Music Themes: "Gensokyo, Past and Present ~ Flower Land"
Though at the time Gensokyo was covered in an unusual amount of flowers, Yuuka was not terribly surprised. Because she has lived so long, she had encountered the incident before and was already aware of the cause. Also, she may simply have enjoyed the seasonal flowers' presence.
She has the ability to manipulate flowers, such as making flowers bloom and returning withered flowers to a healthy state. Because of this, Reimu and the others were certain she was the culprit, even though their suspicions were misplaced.
Yuuka boasts considerable strength among the youkai of Gensokyo-- not so much because of her ability to manipulate flowers, but rather because her basic physical and magical abilities as a youkai are very high. The experience she's built up over her long life may also contribute to her strength.
In her battle against the final boss, Eiki Shiki, Yamaxanadu, she challenged Eiki while saying that she wanted to clarify which of the two was the strongest in Gensokyo. This implies that Yuuka herself is also very confident in her strength.
"Guide of the Sanzu River"
Komachi Onozuka
Species: Shinigami
Abilities: Manipulation of distance
Music Themes: "Higan Retour ~ Riverside View"
In the Touhou series, shinigami are those who oversee living beings' lifespans from the afterlife, write court transcripts for the Yama's trials, and serve in various other such jobs. Komachi serves as the boatman of the Sanzu River, where her job is to carry the souls of the dead from Shigan (the mortal world) to Higan, where the Yama awaits them.
Shinigami are subordinate to the Yamas, and Komachi is the subordinate of Eiki Shiki, Yamaxanadu, the Yama in charge of Gensokyo. As such, she often ferries the humans and youkai of Gensokyo across the river as well.
She enjoys conversation, particularly with the phantoms riding on her boat. However, she has a habit of slacking off on her work from time to time, which is what caused Gensokyo to be flooded with phantoms in "Phantasmagoria of Flower View". The amount of phantoms at the time was far higher than usual, though, so it wasn't entirely Komachi's fault.
A fare must be paid before crossing the Sanzu River. Komachi has the ability to alter the river's breadth based on the fare paid. A higher sum means a more narrow river, and so a shorter journey before reaching Higan. The fare consists of a dead soul's entire body of wealth, but said wealth is based on the amount of money that other people spent for them during their life. No matter how much money they had in life, a person who was widely despised will be almost penniless.
"Supreme Judge of Paradise"
Eiki Shiki, Yamaxanadu
Species: Yama
Abilities: Can distinctly judge anything to be good or evil
Music Themes: "Eastern Judgement in the Sixtieth Year ~ Fate of Sixty Years"
Eiki Shiki, Yamaxanadu is one of the judges of the dead-- a Yama. She spends most of her time at Higan, the far shore of the Sanzu River, but sometimes drops by Gensokyo to deliver lectures to the humans and youkai there.
She is capable of "clearly establishing things in black or white"; more specifically, she has an innate standard against which she can judge the good or evil of various things. She uses this ability to conduct trials and pass judgement on whether a soul should go to Heaven, the Netherworld, or Hell.
They are akin to the judges of the mortal world, employed by an organization within Hell known as the "Ministry of Right and Wrong". At one time when Hell was extremely short-staffed, the Ministry appointed Jizo statues from various locations as additional Yamas, and so several Yamas now work as judges all at once.
The ex-Jizo Yamas conduct trials for souls from the location they used to inhabit, so Eiki may very well have been a Jizo statue from Gensokyo.